welcome back to Downing Street for
today's coronavirus briefing before we
start I wanted to let you know that
today's briefing will follow a bit of a
new format following significant demand
as well as questions from the media
we'll take our first questions from a
member of the public this is going to
become a regular feature of these
briefings the questions are selected by
an independent polling organization and
just like the journalists questions and
we don't see the questions in advance
but we'll give them the very best
answers that we can in the past few
hours since we announced this new
approach we've had over 15,000 questions
submitted and you can ask a question
yourself by going to gov dot UK forward
slash ask and today I'm joined by
Professor Chris witty and Professor
Steve Powis the medical director of the
NHS the government is working through
our action plan and at its core the
objective is to protect life and to
protect the NHS both by slowing the
spread of the virus so that we flatten
the curve and by ensuring that the NHS
always has more than enough capacity to
provide critical care for all those who
needed according to the most recent
figures there have been seven hundred
and nineteen thousand nine hundred and
ten tests for coronavirus so far in the
UK including 37 thousand and twenty four
yesterday a hundred and fifty seven
thousand one hundred and forty nine
people have tested positive that's an
increase of four thousand three hundred
and ten cases since yesterday fifteen
thousand and fifty-one people are
currently in hospital with coronavirus
down from fifteen thousand two hundred
and thirty-nine yesterday and sadly of
those hospitalized with the virus twenty
one thousand and ninety two have now
died that's an increase of three
160 fatalities and we must never lose
sight of the human cost of coronavirus
and the pain and the grief that it
causes and each death serves as a
reminder that we must stand firm in our
resolve sadly these deaths figures
include 82 NHS colleagues and 16
colleagues who work in social care they
dedicated their lives to caring for
others and I feel a deep personal sense
of duty that we must care for their
loved ones today I'm able to announce
that the government is setting up a Life
Assurance scheme for NHS and Social Care
frontline colleagues families of Staff
who died from coronavirus in the course
of their essential frontline work will
receive a sixty thousand pound payment
of course nothing replaces the loss of a
loved one
but we want what we want to do
everything that we can to support
families who are dealing with this grief
and as a government we're looking
closely at other professions that work
on the front line against coronavirus
who don't who also do not have access to
such schemes to see where this may be
required this crisis crisis has shown
this country value so much our health
and social care workers and I want to
pay tribute to the perseverance of the
British public who even this warm spring
weekend in their vast majority did the
right thing and stayed at home to
protect the NHS thus far in this crisis
at every single hour of every single day
the NHS has always had the capacity to
treat the people who need that treatment
I'm glad to be able to report that there
are now 3190 spare critical care beds
indeed 42 percent of oxygen supported
bed
in the NHS now lie empty and in most
parts of the country the number of
people in hospital with coronavirus is
beginning to fall what are the reasons
NHS capacity has always exceeded need is
because of our amazing program of NHS
Nightingale hospitals today I was proud
to attend virtually the opening of the
eighth of our ten Nightingale hospitals
across the UK again built in a matter of
weeks
this Nightingale hospital project stands
as a monument to the nation's ability to
get things done when it matters this is
one of the most ambitious projects this
country has ever seen in peacetime and
I'd like to thank the NHS the Armed
Forces and all the companies that have
worked side-by-side to make these plans
of reality the Nightingale project is
just one of the measures that's boosted
capacity all across the NHS by Rhian
listing thousands of former staff former
clinicians and enrolling early thousands
of students we've boosted the workforce
of the NHS and we've changed forever the
digital capability of the NHS I think
many people who've now used online GP
consultations and online outpatient
visits won't ever go back and I pay
tribute to the staff who've worked in
different ways to how they would ever
have imagined and who've been more
flexible and open to change when it was
really needed so where there have been
advances amongst these huge challenges
of this crisis we must not lose them
however we also know that fewer people
are coming to the NHS when they need to
any attendances have dropped to two
hundred and twenty one thousand
emergency department attendances in the
last week compared to four hundred and
seventy seven thousand in the same week
last year that's more than fifty percent
now some of this drop is due to lower
road traffic and people following the
social distancing rules some of it will
be due to people accessing the NHS in
ways that work better
them like online or through pharmacies
and that's a good thing but in some
cases we know that the drop is due to
people not coming forward and using the
NHS for critical things that matter our
message is that the NHS is open help us
to help you so if you're worried about
chest pains for instance maybe you might
be having a heart attack or a stroke or
you feel a lump and you're worried about
cancer or you're a parent concerned
about your child please come forward and
seek help as you always would it is so
important that everybody uses the NHS
responsibly and the NHS will always be
there for you when you need it just as
it's been there for us all throughout
this crisis and throughout our lives and
as the number of hospitalizations from
coronavirus begins to fall I can
announce that starting tomorrow we'll
begin the restoration of other NHS
services starting with the most urgent
like cancer care and mental health
support the exact pace of the
restoration will be determined by local
circumstances on the ground
according to local need and according to
the amount of a coronavirus cases that
the hause bat hospital is having to deal
with having written off thirteen point
four billion pounds worth of historic
NHS debt I want to ensure that the NHS
is always there in a way that doesn't
just help us recover from coronavirus as
a country but also puts as in a stronger
position for the future we're coming
through this peak will honor those
who've dedicated their lives to caring
for others but it will count for nothing
if we let things slip now and risk a
second peak I know that lockdown is hard
for so many people but let us all have
the resolve to see this through so
please stay at home protect the NHS and
save lives
we're now going to go to Professor Chris
Witte the chief medical officer for the
daily data charts and then we're going
to take questions from the public
thank you very much Secretary of State
so just the first slide is just a
reminder to people that of the five
tests for adjusting the lockdown the
first three of which are about the
epidemic that the NHS has capacity to
provide critical care across the UK a
sustained and consistent fall in the
daily deaths over overall from
coronavirus and the rate of infection
decrease to manageable levels across the
board then there's an operational point
about operational challenges including
testing and PPE in hand with supply able
to meet future demand and then finally
and importantly confident that the
adjustments to current measures will not
risk a second peak of infections next
slide please
the next two slides are really ways of
looking at whether people are continuing
as they have been consistently
throughout this crisis to heed the
guidance in terms of keeping pressure
off the NHS by staying at home unless
they have to go out for necessary things
and as you can see after a very
remarkable fall initially broadly this
has been flat very slight trending up in
terms of motor vehicles but otherwise
really the data remain largely unchanged
on these transport metrics next slide
please
and then looking at other forms the
driving are we've talked about before a
very slight increase in walking public
transport remains largely flat so
evidence I think that the great majority
of people are continuing to honor the
lockdown which is helping us to drive
the number of cases down and therefore
take pressure off the NHS next slide
please the next few slides are really
ones that people who watch these
briefings will be very familiar with
which is the most recent data so new
cases in the UK as you can see obviously
one thing you have to bear
bear in mind is the number of tests is
going up overall but despite that the
trend is flat or slightly down in terms
of positive cases next slide please
but when we actually look up to people
in hospital
I think the trends that demonstrate that
over the country as a whole we're going
through the peak are reasonably clear to
see obviously a bigger fall in London
but the rest of the country in different
areas either flat or decreasing over at
a time next slide please
and then when we turn to one of the most
important questions which is critical
care capacity if you look at these
trends across England Scotland Wales and
Northern Ireland these are the
percentage of all critical care beds
being used for coded patients and both
in absolute and in relative terms this
is gradually trending down but
importantly and I talked about this last
time I was here this is a very gradual
peak we're not seeing a dramatic
fall-off and nor do we expect so it's
picked spec 2 in the next short while
next slide please
and finally sadly people are continuing
to die as we have said every time just
after a weekend there's an artificial
drop because there's a less notification
over weekends so the number of cases who
sadly were reported as having died
yesterday with 360 I do actually expect
there will be a bit of an uptick again
later in the week as we catch up from
the weekend drop nevertheless the trend
overall as you can see from the
seven-day rolling average of the top
which smooths out these weekend effects
is a gradual decline but we are
definitely not consistently past the
peak across the whole country at this
point in time
finally a slide which compares different
countries and again I would be really
clear that we should not over interpret
the absolute numbers the way these are
nationally measured in different
countries is different where the trend
lines I think are reasonably clear from
thank you very much thank you very much
Chris
and now we're going to go to the first
question which is from Lynn in Skipton
and I'm going to read out the question
and I'm reading it for the first time
and then we will endeavor to answer it
I'm missing my grandchildren so much
please can you let me know if after the
five criteria are met is being able to
hug our closest family one of the first
steps out of lockdown
well Thank You Lynn for that question an
incredibly important one and brings home
the emotional impact of the lockdown
measures and I think why don't we take
the direct medical evidence from the
chief medical officer well very clearly
for most people the ability to actually
interact with families in a way that
they have not been able to during this
period is absolutely essential in terms
of the direct answer to this lady's
question it depends if I'm honest on the
situation that she finds herself in so
if she is someone who has a significant
medical problem in a way that means that
she would have to be shielding that is
and she's an older person some
grandparents are younger grandparents
some obviously are older if she's in a
group which is vulnerable then the
answer is that it might well be prudent
and this will be depend entirely on
individual circumstances for her not to
get into a situation where she is
putting herself at risk obviously if
she's healthy and younger that may well
not be true but the overall view that
actually one of the things that clearly
is important to everybody is the ability
to get together with families remotely
but also physically everyone fully
accepts nevertheless it is important
that people who are vulnerable continue
to be protected even after whatever the
next steps are occur thank you and the
thing I'd say and tool indirectly is
that we understand the impact of not
being able to hug your closest family
it affects all of us too as well as the
direct health impacts of the lockdown
bringing down the the curve and trying
to stop this terrible disease and also
the economic impacts which are clearly
very significant and there are also the
direct emotional bonds because it's one
of the most natural things in the world
to want to hug a member of your member
of your family and we just hope we can
get back to that as soon as possible and
the best way we can get there fastest is
for people to follow the rules
so we can get those five criteria met as
soon as possible I don't know if you
wanted to have only to add that we all
know how hard this is my own mother
lives hundreds of miles away and I know
she's wondering when she will be seeing
me and her grandchildren again this is
really tough but as the secretary state
has said it is bearing fruit in that we
are seeing reduction in the number of
hospital admissions we're seeing a
reduction in the number of deaths and
it's only by the British public
continuing to comply with that guidance
until the time is right that we will all
continue to see a reduction in deaths
which I know is touched so many people
around the country in terms of loved
ones thank you very much Lynne for your
question and for submitting it and I
hope that I think that's shown that the
questions from the member members of the
public can be just as informative and
can be you know just as difficult to
answer as members as questions from
journalists who are trained to ask them
talking of which hue pin from the BBC
thank you very much question for the
Secretary of State it's about testing
particularly important in the short term
at least for up to 10 million key
workers and their families we're hearing
varying reports on how easy it might be
or not to book tests online what do you
say to that and do you think you will
hit your target of 100,000 tests a day
by the end of this month that's later
this week well thank you I think we are
on track to
to the hundred thousand target we're
broadly where we expected to be you've
seen a big increase over the weekend to
37,000 tests yesterday now we are also
enhancing and making it easier to access
how you get a hold of tests the home
tests have been particularly popular we
delivered five thousand six hundred and
eighty-one of those yesterday and that
that is all about being able to make the
testing as easy for people who if you've
got symptoms you'll by the nature of the
thing you are already ill and so we want
to make it as easy as possible to get
hold of those tests alongside it is
still we're opening more and more
drive-thru centers so we're broadly
where we expected to be and we've got a
lot of work the rest of this week to
keep continuing the ramp up to the gold
that I so clearly set out thanks for you
can I ask a follow-up yes of course
beyond this it's very important you
escalate testing capacity significantly
to prevent or help prevent a second
spike where do you want to be we are a
city in testing ability in a few months
time how many how many so this is a this
is a really important question and of
course you know the reason that I set
the goal and that we're working so hard
towards it is because testing is an
important part of how we keep the spread
of the virus down especially once we've
got the the number of new cases down
through the social distancing measures
so we want testing to continue to
continue to increase as you'll know the
prime minister set a goal of 250
thousands some time ago for especially
for when the antibody tests come on
stream but so far there isn't one of
those that is clinically
valid the so-so will keep on increasing
it's important to note that we've
already gone past the number of tests
per day for instance that they carry out
in South Korea and we're approaching the
levels that that Germany undertakes so
you know this is a it's a project to
keeping increasing also we need to think
very hard and take the clinical advice
on on how to use those tests for
instance we're putting far more into
into care homes we're making sure that
now NHS staff get tested including when
they're asymptomatic to make sure that
we understand whether we're the people
who are working in hospitals have got
the virus and using the tests for
surveys and the office for national
statistics we've got a survey for
instance in the field right now and with
people being tested this week to find
out how many people have got the virus
how many have had the virus the critical
questions that we need to know the the
answers to so I don't know if you want
to add and the anything Chris but the
point is it's a really important
question because the because testing is
a critical part of controlling the virus
once we get the number of new cases down
I mean think about is that the more
testing capacity you've got them the
more flexibility you have to do
different things which both the patients
and in terms of things like care homes
as the secretary state was saying thanks
you Robert Peston ITV good afternoon
on the life insurance scheme will
overseas health care workers within the
NHS and those who come back to the NHS
temporarily will they qualify for this
life insurance right now they don't for
example qualify for normal death
in-service benefits and question I think
largely for Chris witty and more as the
most important test tube set is the
transmission rate the so called are has
to fall turn or point five so you know
you know understand on average it would
take two infected people to infect one
other person what's the magic of that
naught point five why does it give you
comfort and also since we still don't
know how many people are walking around
with funny symptoms or no symptoms of
what's all who have the virus how can
you be remotely confident you know that
you will get there Neil Ferguson said he
thinks that the number is currently
naught point six to naught point seven
but how can we possibly be confident of
that I'll take the first question
Robert the answer is yes this is for
frontline staff working in the NHS and
in social care who who died what as and
our and our employees within the NHS and
social care and as I say we're also
looking at which other groups of key
workers that applies to and who don't
have a scheme already in place Chris on
or 0.5 can I just correct I mean I don't
record ever saying that the target was
not 0.5 what I have said is that it's in
the range nor point 5 to 1 at the
present time probably somewhere in the
middle of that range and the second
thing which I have said is that is
really important we do not go above 1
that one is an absolute target and the
reason for that is that once it goes
above 1 for any prolonged period of time
and then might just wake up for a short
period then you go back to exponential
growth and then sooner or later
depending how much above 1 it is you get
back to the situation the NHS is
threatened to be overwhelmed because
exponential growth goes from very small
numbers to very large numbers very fast
so I would like to clarify that it's a
knocking above one is the long term
target clearly that short the lower we
can get it at the moment the better but
as I say it's probably in the middle of
the range point five to one of the
present and that is bringing down the R
which is what you're actually seeing
when you look at the critical care and
other metrics we looked at in the slides
thanks very much yeah of course one
actually actually just on the on the
life insurance and just to be clear
there's nothing in this life insurance
scheme look would waive the
rights of the families of individuals
who get cohered and you know either die
or seriously injured from said suing the
NHS in the traditional way if they feel
they haven't been properly protected
particularly in the absence they might
feel of appropriate PPE
yeah there's no that there's no waving
of their standard employment rights
involved in any of this all right no
Beth Rigby from Sky
thank you I professor Witte at the
beginning of the lock dancer Patrick
suggested a death toll below 20,000 was
a good outcome
now hospital deaths are sadly above
21,000 and that doesn't even include
care home all community deaths
how have you had to change your
expectations as the D is these as
progressed and can you provide an
updated expectation of what you think a
more realistic number is now and
secretary of state you've promised a
hundred thousand tests by Thursday and
last week you said trace track and taste
sorry trace and track was key to easing
social distancing measures what level of
testing do you need to get track and
trace up and running and what's your
time frame for that yeah and go ahead so
on the foot on the first one the number
will definitely see 20,000 so even with
hospital deaths as you say sadly it has
gone above that once we look into direct
and indirect and I constantly make this
point it is really important direct and
indirect deaths all cause mortality we
definitely sadly do expect it to exceed
that I think that my view actually is we
need to view this epidemic over the long
run and this has got a very long way to
run and I'm really cautious about
putting out and I've said this again
repeatedly these kind of absolute
numbers because this could go in a lot
of different ways over the next many
months until such time as we have a
clear exit that has a vaccine or drugs
or some other route that allows us to be
able to say look we
couldn't stop people dying from this and
this is going to be true to be clear in
every country around the world so I'm
really cautious about putting these
absolute numbers but I am absolutely
clear also that the 20,000 number is is
not where we will be once we've had in
the direct and indirect causes both in
and out of hospital and on the question
on test track and trace it's all a
matter of degree and the the lower the
number of new cases the more effective a
system of test track and trace of any
scale is and therefore a hundred
thousand tests a day is a big enough
testing system to start test track and
trace but if it's bigger then the system
can work on a higher number of cases and
be more effective South Korea is a
really good example where they peaked in
terms of tests a day at just over 20,000
and they've now brought that down
because their number of new cases is so
much lower they can test everywhere they
want and they still don't need to use up
all of the tests that they have the
capacity for and we've seen over the
last few weeks that the gaps between
capacity and the number of tests done in
this country as well and I know to you
know on Sunday the new German ambassador
to the UK was explaining that there's a
the number of tests the test capacity in
Germany is 800 thousand a week and own
they use 450 thousand of that capacity
each week so we have a similar pattern
of the capacity being higher than tests
use all around the world and the
capacity that we're building is is is
big enough to get started on test track
and trace we need to get the the the
track and the trace part of that up and
running so that they can be effective as
we bring the number of new cases down
can I just can I just follow up just on
one thing professor Witte just just
quickly what what explains the mismatch
between where you thought the death toll
would be at the beginning
the lockdown and where we are ending up
at a month being what changed over the
course of the past few weeks
I've never put an absolute number into
the public domain I've been asked this
lots of times my aim has always been to
try and get the number to be the minimum
we can manage but to be clear this has
got a very long way to run and I think
just thinking about the first P which
due to the fantastic work the whole
nation has done and the work of the NHS
we have actually managed to go through
we've still got some way before it's
falling right off but there is a long
long way to go beyond that and I think
it's a big mistake in my view just to
consider just the first phase we need to
look at the epidemic as a whole
thanks very much Beth Gary Gibbon from
channel 4 says of woody can I follow up
on Robert what Robert Peston was asking
about on the infection rates if we are
in the middle of the 0.5 to 1 range will
that do is that good enough or is it
actually the the rate that you need to
give clearance to a relaxation of the
rules is lower than that is perhaps
around point 5 well I think there are I
mean clearly the lower the are and just
to remind people who don't watch this
program the whole time this is if well
if are as one one person gives it to one
person and the disease is stable if R is
0.5 ten people give it to 5 and so Onex
going down and if it's to one person
gives it to two gives it to four and so
on it's just that was just a
clarification for people watching the
further away the r is from one and on
the downside so the closer it is what
the lower it is the better for two
reasons the first of which is that it
will mean that the the peak will fall
away faster and we'll get down to small
numbers at a quicker rate that's a good
thing clearly but the second thing is
the the larger the gap between where the
R is the current Falls the transmission
and one the greater room from the new
Voter is in term terms of trying to
think through when ministers have to
look at
in terms of what could be reintroduced
without threatening the risk that we
could go back above one and start going
back to click to exponential growth so
we know what we've currently measured
indirectly but I think that there's a
reasonable degree of confidence that
it's in that broader range point five to
one and I think it's probably in a
rather narrower range in the middle of
that obviously if he was lower that
would give us more room from the better
give some room for maneuver but it
doesn't give a huge amount of room for
maneuver and that's one of the things
that we ministers are gonna have to
consider is how to actually make sure we
keep the are below 1 given where we are
at the moment thanks to what everybody
is doing but you know there isn't a
magic number here lower is better but
it's not that there is a specific number
that has to be the right number what's
your current estimate of what our Lord
is measuring in hospitals and care homes
I think at the moment is quite difficult
and it's quite difficult to separate
those two out my expectation is that it
is very clear it is falling in hospitals
where it is in terms of care homes I
think he's less easy to work out at this
point we've got ons data coming out
tomorrow which may help a bit but we're
not measuring that directly I have to
say and what I think we're seeing across
the country is some care homes where
there are significant outbreaks and
other care homes which are unaffected
they're not kind of it's not it's not
like the community are which is much
more heavily influenced by the whole of
the population it's much more local to
particular areas and particular care
homes and maybe Steve could answer on
the NHS so in hospitals it's clear that
the number of people who are testing
positive in hospitals is falling and
therefore infection rates are falling we
would expect that because we're now in a
position where the community spread of
the virus is less and therefore that
will translate into lower spread in
people coming into hospital and
therefore in hospitals as well as Chris
said I think care homes think
differently in terms of approach to that
but in hospitals it's clear that the
infection rate is falling
thanks very much Gary Sebastian Payne of
the FT
thank you very much mr. Hancock and
there were reports over the weekend that
in the second phase of fighting the
corona virus the government is planned
to quarantine people arriving in the UK
for 14 days I was wondering what changed
your mind about tighter border
restrictions and does that mean you're
going to be encouraging British families
to holiday at home this year and if I
can ask a question of her professor
Witte could you give us an update on
antibody testing please and whether the
government has seen any breakthrough in
its assessments for those tests thanks
very much eye on on the borders we've
been very clear that we follow the
science and given the current level of
infections level of new cases in the UK
and the very low amounts of
international travel that's going going
on right now it is clear that the impact
on the epidemic as a whole of the number
of people coming through the borders as
a proportion is very low but as we bring
the number of new cases down in the UK
that proportion coming from those who
are travelling internationally and will
rise and that means that the the
judgment on the measures that you need
at the border changes and we've seen a
number of countries go through this
process and and we'll have more to say
about it
in due course on the testing point I
don't know whether you want to go into
that but there's a the antibody test is
still something that we work on we have
now lab based antibody tests in fact in
the field now this the office for
national statistics survey is based on
lab based antibody tests but we're yet
to find a what's called a lateral flow
which means a test you can even taking
you don't need to send the sample to a
lab because it gives you the result on
the stick stick we're yet to find one
that has a clinical level of
of results that we are confident in come
in so my view is that science very
seldom moves forward by breakthroughs it
moves forward by small incremental
changes that over time significantly
improve things that is what I think will
happen with this antibody test we
currently have tests that are good
enough to give us a first pass at
arranging shot on surveys to give us a
feel for how many people in the
community overall may have been infected
some of them without knowing it because
there's certainly some transmission
without people actually getting symptoms
but an antibody test that is good enough
actually to be able to say to an
individual we're confident either yes
you've had it or were confident no you
have not we have not yet got to that
stage and I think it's unlikely to
happen in a single leap it's likely to
happen in this series of small
improvements that get us to a point
where we feel sufficient confidence we
can do that Thank You mr. could I just
ask a follow-up please so you mentioned
earlier you encouraging people that if
they've got heart pains or a worried
about serious illness to go to hospital
has the government done any work to
measure some of the health side effects
of the lockdown such as its impact on
mental health or domestic violence and
will that play any part in your decision
on how to ease the lockdown measures yes
we have and one of the striking things
around the world is that far fewer
people are coming forward to use health
services including the including here
far fewer people are coming forward to
use non-covered services in the NHS and
Alice professor powers - to elaborate
because he's been doing a lot of work on
this yes so secretary state said and as
Chris said earlier one of the things
that we have concerns around are the
indirect deaths eye deaths and harm that
is not related specifically to infection
with Kovac 19 and that's why for some
weeks now we've all been reminding
everybody that if you do have a
condition which might be a heart attack
chest pain symptoms that might be a
stroke then don't forget that the NHS is
still there for you the emergency
services are there and always have
been there through throughout this and
also these are conditions where it's
important not to wait because treatment
in diagnosis and treatment
Speedy's of the essence and we can do
many things for those conditions now but
we need to do it quickly so the message
to the public is come forward the NHS is
working if you have a sick child if you
have those symptoms I think in the long
term we will only be able to tease this
out as we start to look at excess deaths
overall chris has mentioned that I think
earlier today and of course comparisons
between countries in terms of excess
deaths will be important as well but we
do know that attendances in A&E
department are down there are reasons
that that might be the case but there
are reasons why people why we want to
encourage people to come forward if they
have emergency symptoms that might might
need emergency treatment so I think it
will become clearer over time but the
key message for the public is the NHS is
there for you come forward as you always
would if you've got symptoms or one of
your loved ones has got symptoms that
might need emergency treatment thanks
very much so Gordon Rayner from The
Telegraph Thank You chefs take professor
professor Witte you you said in March
that children only got mild symptoms of
corner virus which he said was in silver
lining while Sir Patrick balance said
closing schools would have a minimal
effect on the spread of the virus so it
was safe to keep them open and there was
zero chance of children avoiding contact
with each other anyway to what extent
does your advice on sending children to
school changed have you worked out the
effect on the r-value of sending
children back to school and also do you
believe that children can spread
coronavirus to other children following
reports at the weekend that perhaps they
couldn't and just very quickly secretary
of state you've just announced good news
for a lot of people that hospitals are
going to start taking in cancer patients
and doing other non-emergency work can
you give us more detail on that and and
would people be watching this be wrong
to interpret that as the start of an
easing of the lockdown
a critic the first one and then I'll ask
Eve to comment so it remains the case
that the great majority of children
either don't get coronavirus or if they
do the symptoms online er that doesn't
mean sadly that that is absolutely true
there are still a small number of cases
including some very severe cases but
they are relative to adults much less
than their not less than adults so
that's that's that remains absolutely
the case so the first reason for not
sending children to school which is it's
particularly dangerous for them that
wouldn't be true in the case of
coronavirus there is secondly there is
no doubt that they contribute if you
have schools open it does contribute to
increasing the our so if you close
schools the R goes down it's part of the
collection of things that were done in
March to try and pull the R from where
it was near 3:00 to where it is now
below one that's not it's only one of
you if you did it just on its own it
wouldn't be enough but if you stopped
doing it you would actually lose some of
the benefits that we've currently got
now there is a quite a debate at the
moment around the world in science what
contribution do children make to the
actual spread of this virus between
families around the country wherever
we're talking about and is it different
for example between young children and
older children which it may be but
unfortunately we do not yet have direct
data that really help us remembering
that this is a new disease so we can
give a reason the accurate answer for
disease like flu we really understand
how children help Drive flu we're still
really learning on this one and so
whilst I think it remains the case that
we think that the the contribution of
children at school to the to the spread
of this virus is probably less than for
example for flu we do think it certainly
contributes and what we're trying to
work out is what proportion of the ARRA
contributes and therefore if children
went back to school how much closer to
one and that's in a bad way would we be
and could it even tip us above one and
how what can we do if so to try and
minimize that so it's a very
it's a very good question to which there
is unfortunately not a really clear
answer but we are getting closer I think
to having a slightly narrower range of
uncertainty around around this thanks
grace on the restoration of the NHS
we've always said throughout that people
should come forward for medical
treatment so people's access to the NHS
access to medical treatment has never
been locked down indeed it's one of the
four reasons that you should leave your
house if you need to and what we can do
though is because we now have the
capacity in the NHS to be able to start
reopening some services and we can do
that and I'll ask christiev to answer
the question about with more detail but
it will be locally determined according
to what capacity there is locally but
our message to people watching this and
reading the Daily Telegraph is that the
NHS is open and there to help you as it
always is and so people if it should if
they think they need medical treatment
from the NHS then they should come
forward in the first instance by phoning
up their GP or going to their GP online
calling one more more yes so as a
secretary sight says we are now in a
position to retaining some of the
services that we may have had to have
sent down to manage the surge in
coronaviruses or occasionally where
services have become disrupted so for
instance I know cancer patients there
may be good clinical reasons why
treatment might be delayed during a time
when there is a lot of circulating virus
in the community and and again as we've
both said emergency services have been
there all along and it's really
important that people access them but I
think to answer your question directly
it's it's not at all a sign that the
lockdown is about to be relaxed in fact
I think it's the reverse it's a sign
that the lockdown and the measures that
have been taken and the fact that
everybody's following them has meant
that we are now seeing a decline in
patients
in hospital with Kovac Kovac 19 and it's
exactly that is that that is providing
the capacity once again that means that
we can get back to restarting services
such as elective surgery so I think the
message shouldn't be now is the time to
relax the message should be that by
continuing to comply with these
instructions it will continue to help
the NHS as we we start to get over the
peak and that the plateaus to a point
where we can get much more back to the
services that unfortunately we've had to
delay over the last few weeks as we've
managed this surge of course yeah I've
just just on the school's question I
mean listening to that and so that
professor Witte gave it a lot of people
I think listening to this would
interpret that as meaning that there
still isn't really a plan in place for
how schools are going to go back would
it be wrong to to infer that from what
you're saying well Chris I'll just say
what I've says it's it's still as we've
said over and over again too early to
make decisions on this and people should
follow the social distancing rules of
staying at home to protect the NHS and
save lives and in a way what we've been
saying today about the restarting of
many of hospital treatments NHS
treatments and the encouragement of many
people to come forward when they haven't
been coming forward with non kovat
health problems is all part of
protecting the NHS which has been made
possible by the fact that the we've
flattened the curve
thanks to their social distancing
measures so it should be seen in that
light in that context but on the school
specifically Chris John to answer so I
think when making the starting with the
obvious point that obviously the final
decisions will be for ministers and this
is not a scientific decision but what we
can contribute from the science side is
to say well look we've got this room for
maneuver between where the R is now and
one and there's a lot of things that are
contributing which everyone's doing
putting that down schools are
contributing some of that and it may be
different between different bits of
schools and what we're trying to do you
know very very ensure very very short
order is trying to give a kind of feel
for what are the combinations of
different things which actually still
keep the are below 1 which is an
absolutely critical thing but allow
opening up a different bits of of
society and different bits which schools
is one but I think the decision about
how the different combinations go
together that finally is one for
ministers and I I know this echo state
will completely agree with that what we
can do is help provide some data to help
say here are some combinations of things
we can do but and I really want to be
clear about this there is no perfect
solution where we're going to end up be
able to do all the things that people
want and at the same time keep our below
one so there are going to have to be
some very difficult choices between
different things all of which ideally
all of us would love to open that but we
can't do them all and therefore there
will have to be some difficult choices
and choices around schools clearly will
be one of those is that okay Gordon
yes great we've got David Walsh from the
Sheffield Star Secretary of State and
raised the bar campaign wants to
increase the threshold or the 25,000
pounds of retail hospitality and leisure
grants from 51 thousand pounds breaks
without you to 150,000 in several City
Centre this would mean the further 157
businesses benefit from additional 3.9
million pounds of support this to take
businesses and jobs unless the action
and a second one for this extra day
please
chef bill these famous for its
independent breweries it has more per
capita than anywhere in the country and
was enjoying a bourbon age rise of the
Christ the government's support and
support at a time there was no opening
day yet for pubs and bars their very
existence is under threat to get them
back on their feet will the government
cancel
beers you
see the six months when they're allowed
to restart operations
well thanks David I I understand
especially coming from a small business
background myself just how important
these questions are to the businesses in
the center of Sheffield and the
breweries which have as you say been
flourishing right across the country
over the past few years and the and and
have obviously been very hard hit by
social distancing by its nature which
which takes away the ability to go for a
point with friends so I will take these
away and talk to the Chancellor about
them what I would say is his
announcement today of hundred percent
guaranteed loans for smaller businesses
is another important step in supporting
businesses to get through this we
recognize the the importance of
supporting businesses right across the
board and whether they're in a town
centre breweries or others who are badly
hit by this the supporting businesses
through it is critical because both the
health impact of the measures and the
economic impact are both best served by
people saying at home because that saves
lives but we'll also get the rate of
transmission down as fast as possible
which will then allow us to get through
this as soon as possible so we want to
get through it as soon as possible and
we want to support businesses on the way
through and those two specific ideas and
I it's tempting to say yes to as health
secretary but I think there needs to
talk to the Chancellor thanks very much
Dave west from the hsj hi thank you
first question for mr. Hancock and could
you tell us a bit more about the
restoration of services generalist plan
services in the NHS and there are
millions on people on the waiting list
for general operations or appointments
hip replacements or cataracts and things
when would you expect what sort of
timeframe we do expect that kind of
general activity to be getting back to
normal
might it be region by region and what
role do those Nightingale hospitals have
to play in that which you mentions and
the second second question if I can for
Chris or Steven this morning hsj
revealed the warning to doctors about
the small numbers of children who are
becoming seriously ill and with an
unusual set of symptoms which the
experts believe may be an emerging
symptom linked to coronavirus do you
think this may be a new feature of of
the outbreak or are you pretty confident
that these are simply cases of the small
very small number of serious cases of
corona virus which we do see in children
I'm very worried about the latter and
I'm we are looking into it closely I'll
ask Steve to answer on that on the
restoration this will be a locally
driven approach system by system the of
course the principles are that the most
urgent treatment should be brought back
first and also that it needs to be
according to to the local demands on the
system you know there's parts of the
country where the number of Kovac
patients is a proportion and is much
lower than in other parts and so it has
to be locally driven that means I'm
fortunate I can't give you a sort of
concrete single number answer to when
and it is it is it is gradually over
weeks but starting from tomorrow Steve
yes thanks Dave yes so as you've
referred to we have become aware in the
last few days of reports of severe
illness in children which might be a
Kawasaki like disease so Kawasaki
disease is a very rare inflammatory
condition that occurs in children the
cause is not often known I can't be
related to a number of things so it's
only in the last few days as I say that
we've seen those reports and I know you
you reported that in that in the Health
Service Journal this morning so both
Chris and I are aware of that we have
asked our experts why vas a national
clinical director for children young
people to look into this as a matter of
urgency a sec
state is concerned as he said I know
public health England they're also
looking into this so it's obviously
important that when clinicians see these
cases and and worry that there might be
a cluster that they alert other
clinicians so that we can make sure that
they are identified if they're occurring
elsewhere and then I think quite rightly
we ask our experts to look into them and
to see whether they can establish any
link we're not sure at the moment it's
it's really too early to say whether
there is a link but what I should say as
we said already this afternoon is our
advice to parents is that these are the
sort of disease is very very rare if you
are worried about a child who is
becoming sick and not recovering then do
remember to contact one-one-one talk to
GP or an emergency contact 999 because
the emergency services in the NHS are
there for Sick Children and it's
important for this and other conditions
although although very rare must
emphasise rare that you come forward to
seek treatment and diagnosis as quickly
as possible
Thanks I'm just ready to reinforce what
Steve said this is a very rare situation
but I think it is entirely plausible
that this is caused by this virus at
least in some cases because we know that
in adults who of course have much more
disease than children do there's an the
big problems are caused by an
inflammatory process and this looks
rather like an inflammatory process a
rather different one but therefore given
that we've got a new presentation of
this at a time with a new disease the
possibility is not definite we need to
look for other causes as well but the
possibility that there is a link is
certainly plausible but back to Steve's
overriding point numbers very small key
thing is if parents are worried then
phone up and get advice it's very rare
it's very quick follow-up on the
restoration yes and the NHS needed to I
free up about 30,000 beds to ensure it
was ready to deal with the first peak
and and has been able to do so but has
used a lot of capacity and that's
rearranged a lot of things
how many will it is it going to need to
keep open in case of a second Ecore or
other returns of the virus because
that's clearly going to be a big
constraining
factura melon with the staff who staff
the beds on what it can get do back to
normal
well one of the principles of the tests
we've set before we make any adjustments
to the social distancing measures is
that we shouldn't risk a second peak for
many many reasons the direct impact of
course but also because a second peak
would mean that we would have to halt
the restoration of the NHS for non
covert treatments and that has an impact
itself on the health of the nation as as
Chris Witte first set out several weeks
ago in terms of the indirect death rate
so we've got to make sure that we don't
have that second peak therefore the NHS
is of course making sure that it can
reopen where that locally is appropriate
given the local that amount of pressure
on the on the system and also take into
account the nightingale hospitals in
fact I'm going to answer a question that
was asked previously but by Beth Rigby I
think but I didn't answer which is that
the nightingales are not going to be
used for for non coronavirus purposes
because they are precisely set up and
designed to deal with people who are
intubated and are under and are sedated
and but it but the fact that they're
there does help us to restore more of
the core NHS and and get that going as
much as possible did you want we were
coming in again I'm just gonna say we're
very finally would you see them all the
Nightingale hospitals all seven or I
think it's seven or eight now what to be
used in that way in the in the first
instance yes but but as we go through
this we always keep things like this
open to review to work out what's the
best way to use the resources at the
nation's disposable stick yes I think
the nightingales
specifically have been a very important
part of the flexibility that the NHS has
put in place to manage the surge
remember it's only a few weeks ago
that we were really concerned that we
would see a surge in patients
particularly those that need a critical
care that would go beyond even the surge
capacity we could put in place in our
existing critical care facilities by
surging into theaters and recovery areas
so the nightingales I think a real proof
that the NHS can be agile and flexible
and can change its model of care in a
very short period of time clearly we
want to keep them there because them
although the peak is reducing we still
feel that we we need to have them there
as the insurance policy that for Kovic
patients but as we go forward we will be
keeping them under review as the
secretary of state as said and and of
course we're only into the first week or
so of coming off a plateau in a peak and
as you would expect all that work
gained it's a secre status as indicated
is being done at the moment to plan
capacity going forward and the
restoration of services is a really
important part of that which I'm
absolutely sure will occur hospital by
hospital and region by region because
infection rates are a bit different
everywhere and because different
organizations have stepped up to manage
the surgeon in in slightly different
ways but the key point is that we are
now in a position to bring those
services increasingly back on stream if
you'd asked me a month ago David that
whether we would be having this
discussion now about the restoration of
those parts of the NHS that we had to
pause in order to put capacity towards
treating coronavirus and the question is
how much Energy's capacity do we need to
keep in hand in case there's a there's a
second outbreak which we you know we
don't want to risk the I would be you
know that I would fret and that the NHS
had not in the meantime being at all
overtopped by demand in any instance
then I think we'd be if you give if you
told me that a month ago I would be very
pleased with where we've come to on the
NHS capacity because because that is
absolute
core to the principles of this country
is that if you need NHS treatment then
you get it and we've managed to keep
that principle throughout this this this
vast crisis okay thank you very much
indeed that concludes our Downing Street
briefing for today see the headlines as
they happen and watch BBC news live in
the app and get the full story with BBC
dog code at UK forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with BBC
News